.\" Copyright (c) 2025 Apple Inc. All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" @APPLE_OSREFERENCE_LICENSE_HEADER_START@
.\"
.\" This file contains Original Code and/or Modifications of Original Code
.\" as defined in and that are subject to the Apple Public Source License
.\" Version 2.0 (the 'License'). You may not use this file except in
.\" compliance with the License. The rights granted to you under the License
.\" may not be used to create, or enable the creation or redistribution of,
.\" unlawful or unlicensed copies of an Apple operating system, or to
.\" circumvent, violate, or enable the circumvention or violation of, any
.\" terms of an Apple operating system software license agreement.
.\"
.\" Please obtain a copy of the License at
.\" http://www.opensource.apple.com/apsl/ and read it before using this file.
.\"
.\" The Original Code and all software distributed under the License are
.\" distributed on an 'AS IS' basis, WITHOUT WARRANTY OF ANY KIND, EITHER
.\" EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, AND APPLE HEREBY DISCLAIMS ALL SUCH WARRANTIES,
.\" INCLUDING WITHOUT LIMITATION, ANY WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY,
.\" FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE, QUIET ENJOYMENT OR NON-INFRINGEMENT.
.\" Please see the License for the specific language governing rights and
.\" limitations under the License.
.\"
.\" @APPLE_OSREFERENCE_LICENSE_HEADER_END@
.\"
.\" This manual page is based on the POSIX.1-2001 specification for aio_fsync()
.\" as published by The Open Group at:
.\" https://pubs.opengroup.org/onlinepubs/009604499/functions/aio_fsync.html
.\"
.Dd November 10, 2025
.Dt AIO_FSYNC 2
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm aio_fsync
.Nd asynchronous file synchronization (REALTIME)
.Sh LIBRARY
.Lb libc
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.In aio.h
.Ft int
.Fn aio_fsync "int op" "struct aiocb *aiocbp"
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Fn aio_fsync
function shall asynchronously force all I/O operations associated with the file
indicated by the file descriptor
.Fa aiocbp->aio_fildes
which are queued at the time of the call to
.Fn aio_fsync
to the synchronized I/O completion state.
The function call shall return when the synchronization request has been
initiated or queued to the file or device (even when the data cannot be
synchronized immediately).
.Pp
If
.Fa op
is
.Dv O_SYNC ,
all currently queued I/O operations shall be completed as if by a call to
.Xr fsync 2 ,
meaning that all I/O operations shall be completed as defined for synchronized I/O file integrity completion.
.Pp
The
.Fa aiocbp
argument refers to an asynchronous I/O control block.
The
.Fa aiocbp
value may be used as an argument to
.Fn aio_error
and
.Fn aio_return
in order to determine the error status and return status, respectively,
of the asynchronous operation while it is proceeding.
.Pp
The
.Fa aiocbp
argument points to an
.Vt aiocb
structure.
If this structure contains valid signal information when
.Fn aio_fsync
returns successfully, then when the asynchronous I/O operation completes,
a signal shall be delivered to the process as specified by the
.Fa aio_sigevent
member.
.Sh RETURN VALUES
The
.Fn aio_fsync
function shall return the value 0 if the I/O operation is successfully queued;
otherwise, the function shall return the value -1 and set
.Va errno
to indicate the error.
.Sh ERRORS
The
.Fn aio_fsync
function shall fail if:
.Bl -tag -width Er
.It Bq Er EAGAIN
The requested asynchronous I/O operation was not queued due to system resource limitations.
.It Bq Er EBADF
The
.Fa aio_fildes
member of the
.Vt aiocb
structure referenced by the
.Fa aiocbp
argument is not a valid file descriptor.
.It Bq Er EINVAL
This implementation does not support synchronized I/O for this file.
.It Bq Er EINVAL
The
.Fa op
argument is not
.Dv O_SYNC .
.It Bq Er EINVAL
A value of the
.Fa aiocbp
argument does not refer to an asynchronous I/O control block object for which a
synchronization operation is appropriate.
.El
.Pp
In the event that any of the queued I/O operations fail,
.Fn aio_return
shall return the error condition encountered.
If the requested operation does not fail,
.Fn aio_return
shall return the value that would be returned by the corresponding
.Xr fsync 2
call.
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr aio_cancel 2 ,
.Xr aio_error 2 ,
.Xr aio_read 2 ,
.Xr aio_return 2 ,
.Xr aio_suspend 2 ,
.Xr aio_write 2 ,
.Xr fsync 2 ,
.Xr aio 4
.Sh STANDARDS
The
.Fn aio_fsync
function conforms to
.St -p1003.1-2001 .
.Sh HISTORY
The
.Fn aio_fsync
function first appeared in
.Ux Mac OS X 10.3 .
