.\" Copyright (c) 2025 Apple Computer, Inc. All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" The contents of this file constitute Original Code as defined in and
.\" are subject to the Apple Public Source License Version 1.1 (the
.\" "License").  You may not use this file except in compliance with the
.\" License.  Please obtain a copy of the License at
.\" http://www.apple.com/publicsource and read it before using this file.
.\"
.\" This Original Code and all software distributed under the License are
.\" distributed on an "AS IS" basis, WITHOUT WARRANTY OF ANY KIND, EITHER
.\" EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, AND APPLE HEREBY DISCLAIMS ALL SUCH WARRANTIES,
.\" INCLUDING WITHOUT LIMITATION, ANY WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY,
.\" FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE OR NON-INFRINGEMENT.  Please see the
.\" License for the specific language governing rights and limitations
.\" under the License.
.\"
.\"     @(#)getumask.2

.Dd June 1, 2025
.Dt GETUMASK 2
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm getumask
.Nd get file creation mode mask
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Fd #include <sys/stat.h>
.Ft mode_t
.Fo getumask
.Fa "void"
.Fc
.Sh DESCRIPTION

The
.Fn getumask
routine returns the process's file mode creation mask.
.Pp
Configuration of the file creation mode mask is achieved through the
.Fn umask
system call.
.Pp
The default mask value is S_IWGRP | S_IWOTH (022, write access for the
owner only).
Child processes inherit the mask of the calling process.
.Sh RETURN VALUES
The value of the file mode mask is returned by the call.
.Sh ERRORS
The
.Fn getumask
function is always successful.
.Sh LEGACY SYNOPSIS
.Fd #include <sys/types.h>
.Fd #include <sys/stat.h>
.Pp
The include file
.In sys/types.h
is necessary.
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr umask 2
.Sh HISTORY
The
.Fn getumask
system call appeared in OS X 27.0.
