.\" Copyright (c) 2026 Apple Inc. All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" @APPLE_LICENSE_HEADER_START@
.\"
.\" This file contains Original Code and/or Modifications of Original Code
.\" as defined in and that are subject to the Apple Public Source License
.\" Version 2.0 (the 'License'). You may not use this file except in
.\" compliance with the License. Please obtain a copy of the License at
.\" http://www.opensource.apple.com/apsl/ and read it before using this
.\" file.
.\"
.\" The Original Code and all software distributed under the License are
.\" distributed on an 'AS IS' basis, WITHOUT WARRANTY OF ANY KIND, EITHER
.\" EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, AND APPLE HEREBY DISCLAIMS ALL SUCH WARRANTIES,
.\" INCLUDING WITHOUT LIMITATION, ANY WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY,
.\" FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE, QUIET ENJOYMENT OR NON-INFRINGEMENT.
.\" Please see the License for the specific language governing rights and
.\" limitations under the License.
.\"
.\" @APPLE_LICENSE_HEADER_END@
.\"
.Dd January 12, 2026
.Dt OS_LOCKDOWN_MODE_ENABLED 3
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm os_lockdown_mode_enabled
.Nd query the Lockdown Mode state
.Sh LIBRARY
.Lb libc
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.In os/lockdown_mode.h
.Ft bool
.Fn os_lockdown_mode_enabled "void"
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Fn os_lockdown_mode_enabled
function returns a cached value indicating whether Lockdown Mode is
currently enabled on the system.
.Pp
Lockdown Mode is an optional security feature that provides enhanced
protections by reducing attack surface.
This API allows applications to query whether Lockdown Mode is currently
enabled on the system.
.Pp
The value returned by this function is cached and initialized once per process.
The first call to
.Fn os_lockdown_mode_enabled
queries the system state via the
.Xr sysctl 3
interface, and subsequent calls return the cached value.
.Pp
This function will abort the process if an unexpected error occurs while
querying the Lockdown Mode state.
.Sh RETURN VALUES
The
.Fn os_lockdown_mode_enabled
function returns
.Dv true
if Lockdown Mode is enabled.
It returns
.Dv false
if Lockdown Mode is disabled or not supported on the platform.
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr sysctl 3
.Sh HISTORY
The
.Fn os_lockdown_mode_enabled
function first appeared in macOS 27.0, iOS 27.0, watchOS 27.0, tvOS 27.0,
and visionOS 27.0.
