.Dd August 1, 2025
.Dt cryptex.plist 5
.Os Darwin
.Sh NAME
.Nm cryptex.plist
.Nd Property list keys used in cryptex Info.plist
.Sh DESCRIPTION
This manual describes the property list (plist) keys used by the cryptex
framework.
.Sh CRYPTEX INFO.PLIST KEYS
These keys are used in the main Info.plist file of a cryptex and are processed
by cryptexd during cryptex installation and mounting.
.Ss Basic Identity Keys
.Bl -tag -width "CFBundleIdentifier"
.It Sy CFBundleIdentifier Pq Em string, required
The unique identifier for the cryptex bundle.
This follows reverse DNS notation (e.g., "com.example.mycryptex").
.It Sy CFBundleVersion Pq Em string, required
The version string of the cryptex.
Used for dependency resolution and upgrade management.
.It Sy Name Pq Em string, optional
Human-readable name of the cryptex package.
.It Sy Version Pq Em string, optional
Package version identifier (may differ from CFBundleVersion).
.It Sy Publisher Pq Em string, optional
The entity responsible for publishing the cryptex.
.El
.Ss Mount Configuration Keys
.Bl -tag -width "RequiredMountPath"
.It Sy NoCode Pq Em boolean, optional
When set to true, indicates the cryptex contains no executable code.
Such cryptexes have restricted mount paths and cannot bootstrap any content.
.It Sy RequiredMountPath Pq Em string, optional
Specifies a custom absolute path where the cryptex must be mounted.
If not specified, the system will generate a temporary mount point.
For NoCode cryptexes, only specific paths are permitted:
.Bl -bullet -compact
.It
/private/var/MLModels/
.It
/private/var/run/com.apple.security.cryptexd/
.El
.El
.Ss Bootstrap Configuration Keys
.Bl -tag -width "DeveloperModeRequired"
.It Sy BootstrapContents Pq Em array of strings, optional
Specifies which types of content should be bootstrapped from the cryptex.
.Pp
.Sy Important:
This key serves as a selective override mechanism rather than a comprehensive
specification.
Many content types are automatically enabled based on cryptex type and
installation context.
.Pp
.Sy Default Behavior:
.Bl -bullet -compact
.It
.Sy Always enabled:
"Service" and "Jetsam Properties" are automatically included for all cryptexes.
.It
.Sy System cryptex defaults:
"Log Profile" and "Feature Flags" are automatically enabled for system
cryptexes.
.It
.Sy Session cryptex restrictions:
"Library", "Executable", "Factory", and "Log Profile" are disabled for session
cryptexes.
.It
.Sy NoCode cryptex restrictions:
All bootstrap content is disabled for cryptexes marked with NoCode=true.
.El
.Pp
.Sy "Valid content type strings:"
.Bl -bullet -compact
.It
"Service" - Bootstrap launchd services from Library/LaunchDaemons/ and
Library/LaunchAgents/.
.It
"Library" - Create symlinks from cryptex libraries to system library paths
(/usr/local/lib, etc.).
.It
"Executable" - Create binary "trampolines" that redirect system calls to
cryptex executables.
.It
"Factory" - Bootstrap diagnostic content (creates APFS Diags volume, enables
LuaCore, Python, Astro content).
.It
"Log Profile" - Bootstrap logging configuration files from
Library/Preferences/Logging/Subsystems/.
.It
"Feature Flags" - Copy feature flag domain files from
Library/Preferences/FeatureFlags/Domain/.
.It
"Jetsam Properties" - Load Jetsam memory management properties.
.El
.It Sy DeveloperModeRequired Pq Em boolean, optional
When set to true, the cryptex can only be installed when the system is in
developer mode.
.El
.Ss Command Execution Keys
.Bl -tag -width "OSCryptexExecEnvironmentVariables"
.It Sy OSCryptexExecCommand Pq Em string, optional
The main command to execute by cryptexctl exec.
.It Sy OSCryptexExecCommandArguments Pq Em array of strings, optional
Command-line arguments to pass to the main command.
This does not include
.Ql argv[0] .
.It Sy OSCryptexExecEnvironmentVariables Pq Em dictionary, optional
Environment variables to set when executing the main command.
.El
.Ss Dependencies and Security Keys
.Bl -tag -width "LimitInstallToApps"
.It Sy Dependencies Pq Em array of dictionaries, optional
Specifies cryptexes that this cryptex depends on.
Each dependency is a dictionary containing:
.Bl -bullet -compact
.It
CFBundleIdentifier (string, required) - Bundle ID of the dependency.
.It
CFBundleVersion (string, optional) - Minimum required version.
.El
Maximum of 8 dependencies allowed.
.It Sy LimitInstallToApps Pq Em array of dictionaries, optional
Restricts installation to specific applications.
Each entry contains CFBundleIdentifier of an allowed app.
Requires SecureConfigDB support and matching configuration.
Maximum of 256 entries allowed.
.El
.Sh WATCHDOG CONFIGURATION KEYS
These keys are defined in the cryptex Info.plist but reference services that
will be loaded from launchd plists within the cryptex.
.Bl -tag -width "Watchdog"
.It Sy Watchdog Pq Em array of dictionaries, optional
Configuration for service watchdog monitoring.
Each dictionary contains:
.Bl -tag -width "WatchdogMachService"
.It Sy Label Pq Em string, required
Service label that matches a launchd service within the cryptex.
.It Sy ProcessName Pq Em string, required
Name of the process to monitor.
.It Sy WatchdogMachService Pq Em string, required
Mach service name used for watchdog communication.
.It Sy LateFirstCheckin Pq Em boolean, optional
Allow the service to check in late on first startup.
.It Sy PanicOnFirstTimeout Pq Em boolean, optional
Trigger a system panic if the service times out on first startup.
.It Sy CaptureDdtOnTimeout Pq Em boolean, optional
Capture diagnostic data (DDT) when the service times out.
.El
.El
.Sh EXAMPLES
.Ss Basic Info.plist
.Bd -literal -offset indent
<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE plist PUBLIC "-//Apple//DTD PLIST 1.0//EN"
  "http://www.apple.com/DTDs/PropertyList-1.0.dtd">
<plist version="1.0">
<dict>
    <key>CFBundleIdentifier</key>
    <string>com.example.mycryptex</string>
    <key>CFBundleVersion</key>
    <string>1.0.0</string>
    <key>BootstrapContents</key>
    <array>
        <string>Service</string>
        <string>Library</string>
    </array>
    <key>DeveloperModeRequired</key>
    <true/>
</dict>
</plist>
.Ed
.Ss Info.plist with Dependencies
.Bd -literal -offset indent
<dict>
    <key>CFBundleIdentifier</key>
    <string>com.example.dependent</string>
    <key>CFBundleVersion</key>
    <string>2.0.0</string>
    <key>Dependencies</key>
    <array>
        <dict>
            <key>CFBundleIdentifier</key>
            <string>com.example.base</string>
            <key>CFBundleVersion</key>
            <string>1.5.0</string>
        </dict>
    </array>
</dict>
.Ed
.Ss Info.plist with Watchdog
.Bd -literal -offset indent
<dict>
    <key>CFBundleIdentifier</key>
    <string>com.example.monitored</string>
    <key>CFBundleVersion</key>
    <string>1.0.0</string>
    <key>Watchdog</key>
    <array>
        <dict>
            <key>Label</key>
            <string>com.example.myservice</string>
            <key>ProcessName</key>
            <string>myservice</string>
            <key>WatchdogMachService</key>
            <string>com.example.myservice.watchdog</string>
            <key>LateFirstCheckin</key>
            <false/>
            <key>PanicOnFirstTimeout</key>
            <true/>
        </dict>
    </array>
</dict>
.Ed
.Sh ERRORS
Common errors when processing plist keys:
.Bl -tag -width "CRYPTEX_ERR_INVALID_INPUT"
.It Sy EBADPLIST_NP
Missing required keys (CFBundleIdentifier or CFBundleVersion).
.It Sy EINVAL
Invalid dependency specifications or install limit configurations.
.It Sy ETOOMANYREFS
Too many dependencies (>8) or install limit entries (>256).
.It Sy CRYPTEX_ERR_INVALID_INPUT
Malformed watchdog configurations or invalid content type specifications.
.El
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr cryptex 5 ,
.Xr cryptexctl 1 ,
.Xr plist 5
.Sh HISTORY
The cryptex plist key system was introduced as part of the libcryptex framework
for secure, authenticated filesystem extensions in Darwin-based systems.
