.Dd June 8, 2026
.Dt FM 1
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm fm
.Nd command\-line interface for Apple Foundation Models
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Nm
.Op Fl h
.Ar command
.Op Ar options
.Sh DESCRIPTION
fm is a command\-line interface for Apple Foundation Models. It generates responses from Apple's on\-device and Private Cloud Compute language models, counts tokens, generates JSON generation schemas, checks model availability and quota usage, and hosts a Chat Completions API server.
.Pp
By default every command uses the on\-device system model. Pass \-\-model pcc to run against the Apple Foundation Model on Private Cloud Compute instead.
.Pp
Run 'fm <command> \-\-help' for detailed help on an individual command.
.Sh COMMANDS
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It Sy "respond"
Generate a response to a prompt.
.It Sy "chat"
Start an interactive chat session.
.It Sy "token\-count"
Count the tokens in a prompt, instructions, or saved transcript.
.It Sy "schema"
Generate a JSON generation schema.
.It Sy "serve"
Start a Chat Completions API server for Foundation Models.
.It Sy "available"
Check model availability.
.It Sy "quota\-usage"
Check model quota usage.
.El
.Sh MODELS
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It Sy "system"
On\-device Apple Foundation Model (default).
.It Sy "pcc"
Apple Foundation Model on Private Cloud Compute.
.El
.Sh GLOBAL OPTIONS
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It Sy "\-m, \-\-model <model>"
Model to use: system or pcc (default: system).
.It Sy "\-h, \-\-help"
Show help information.
.El
.Sh RESPOND OPTIONS
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It Sy "\-i, \-\-instructions <text>"
Instructions for the model to follow.
.It Sy "\-\-schema <file>"
Path to a JSON schema file, or an inline JSON schema string.
.It Sy "\-\-text <text>"
Text segment to include in the prompt.
.It Sy "\-\-image <path>"
Path to an image to include in the prompt.
.It Sy "\-\-load\-transcript <file>"
Path to a saved transcript for conversational context.
.It Sy "\-\-save\-transcript <name>"
Save the session transcript to ~/.fm/sessions/<name> after responding.
.It Sy "\-\-[no\-]stream"
Stream the output as it is generated (default: on).
.It Sy "\-g, \-\-greedy"
Use greedy sampling.
.It Sy "\-v, \-\-verbose"
Print verbose output.
.It Sy "\-\-use\-case <case>"
System model use case: general or content\-tagging.
.It Sy "\-\-guardrails <level>"
System model guardrail level: default or permissive\-content\-transformations.
.El
.Sh CHAT OPTIONS
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It Sy "\-r, \-\-resume <session>"
Resume a saved chat session.
.It Sy "\-\-continue"
Continue the most recent chat session.
.It Sy "\-i, \-\-instructions <text>"
Instructions for the model.
.It Sy "\-\-set\-default\-model <model>"
Persist <model> as the default for future fm chat sessions.
.El
.Sh TOKEN-COUNT OPTIONS
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It Sy "\-q, \-\-quiet"
Print only the integer count (automatic when stdout is piped or redirected).
.El
.Sh SERVE OPTIONS
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It Sy "\-\-host <address>"
Host address to bind to (TCP mode).
.It Sy "\-\-port <port>"
Port to listen on, 1\-65535 (TCP mode).
.It Sy "\-\-socket <path>"
Unix domain socket path (socket mode).
.El
.Sh SCHEMA
fm schema object generates a JSON generation schema for an object type. Each \-\-string, \-\-integer, \-\-double, or \-\-boolean starts a new property; follow it with \-\-description, \-\-optional, and/or \-\-array to annotate it. Use dot notation (a.b) in property names to nest objects.
.Pp
fm schema object \-\-help documents the full property\-declaration syntax.
.Sh FILES
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It Sy "~/.fm/sessions/"
Saved chat sessions and transcripts.
.El
.Sh EXAMPLES
Generate a response with the on\-device model:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
fm respond 'What is Swift?'
.Ed
.Pp
Stream a response from Private Cloud Compute:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
fm respond \-\-model pcc \-\-stream 'Summarize this article'
.Ed
.Pp
Start an interactive chat with custom instructions:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
fm chat \-\-instructions 'You are a coding assistant'
.Ed
.Pp
Count the tokens in a prompt:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
fm token\-count 'Hello world'
.Ed
.Pp
Generate a JSON schema for an object type:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
fm schema object \-\-name Person \-\-string name \-\-int age
.Ed
.Sh SEE ALSO
Foundation Models documentation: https://developer.apple.com/documentation/foundationmodels
