.\" Copyright (c) 2016 Apple Inc. All rights reserved.
.Dd May 10, 2016
.Dt LOG 1
.Os Darwin
.Sh NAME
.Nm log
.Nd access system wide log messages created by os_log, os_trace, and other logging systems
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Nm
.Op Ar command Op Ar options
.Pp
.Nm
.Cm help Op Ar command
.Pp
.Nm
.Cm collect
.Op Fl -output Ar path
.Op Fl -start Ar date/time
.Op Fl -size Ar num Op k|m
.Op Fl -last Ar num Ns Op s|m|h|d
.Op Fl -device | Fl -device-name Ar name | Fl -device-udid Ar UDID
.Op Fl -predicate Ar predicate
.Op Fl -directory Ar directory
.Pp
.Nm
.Cm config
.Op Fl -reset | Fl -status
.Op Fl -mode Ar modes
.Op Fl -subsystem Ar name Op Fl -category Ar name
.Op Fl -process Ar pid
.Pp
.Nm
.Cm diagnose
.Op Fl -archive Ar archive
.Op Fl -all
.Op Fl -erase
.Op Fl -json
.Op Fl -logd-starts
.Op Fl -process Ar process
.Op Fl -quarantine
.Op Fl -time
.Pp
.Nm
.Cm emit
.Op Fl -type Ar type
.Op Fl -subsystem Ar name
.Op Fl -category Ar name
.Op Fl -signpost-id Ar id
.Op Fl -public
.Ar message
.Pp
.Nm
.Cm erase
.Op Fl -all
.Op Fl -ttl
.Op Fl -uuidtext
.Pp
.Nm
.Cm repack
.Op Fl -archive Ar archive
.Op Fl -fatal-warnings
.Op Fl -mutate
.Op Fl -predicate Ar predicate
.Op Fl -skip-uuid-purge
.\" TODO: these are not documented since they don't work yet. rdar://137683254
.\".Op Fl -last Ar num Ns Oo Ar s|m|h|d Oc | Ar boot
.\".Op Fl -start Ar date/time
.\".Op Fl -end Ar date/time
.Pp
.Nm
.Cm show
.Op Fl -archive Ar archive | Fl -file Ar file
.Op Fl -predicate Ar filter
.Op Fl -highlight-predicate Ar filter
.Op Fl -process Ar pid | process
.Op Fl -source
.Op Fl -style Ar default | compact | json | ndjson | syslog
.Op Fl -color Ar auto | always | none
.Op Fl -directory Ar directory
.Op Fl -start Ar date/time
.Op Fl -end Ar date/time
.Op Fl -metric
.Op Fl -[no-]info
.Op Fl -[no-]debug
.Op Fl -[no-]pager
.Op Fl -[no-]signpost
.Op Fl -[no-]loss
.Op Fl -last Ar num Ns Oo Ar s|m|h|d Oc | Ar boot
.Op Fl -last24
.Op Fl -today
.Op Fl -yesterday
.Op Fl -timezone Ar local | timezone
.Pp
.Nm
.Cm stats
.Op Fl -archive Ar archive | Fl -file Ar file
.Op Fl -sort Ar events | Ar bytes
.Op Fl -count Ar count | Ar all
.Op Fl -start Ar date/time
.Op Fl -end Ar date/time
.Op Fl -last Ar num Ns Oo Ar s|m|h|d Oc | Ar boot
.Op Fl -style Ar human | json
.Op Fl -[no-]pager
.Op Fl -overview | -per-book | -per-file | -sender Ar sender | Fl -process Ar process | Fl -predicate Ar predicate
.Pp
.Nm
.Cm stream
.Op Fl -color Ar auto | always | none
.Op Fl -level Ar default | info | debug
.Op Fl -predicate Ar filter
.Op Fl -process Ar pid | process
.Op Fl -user Ar uid | user
.Op Fl -source
.Op Fl -style Ar default | compact | json | ndjson | syslog
.Op Fl -timeout Ar time Op m|h|d
.Op Fl -type Ar activity | log | trace
.Op Fl -mach-continuous-time
.Op Fl -unreliable
.Op Fl -ignore-dropped
.Op Fl -payload
.Op Fl -[no-]backtrace
.Op Fl -[no-]debug
.Op Fl -[no-]info
.Op Fl -metric
.Op Fl -[no-]signpost
.Sh DESCRIPTION
.Nm
is used to access system wide log messages created by
.Xr os_log 3 ,
.Xr os_trace 3 ,
and other logging systems.
Some commands require root privileges.
.Pp
Available commands and their options:
.Bl -tag -width "collect    "
.It Cm help
General help or help specific to command argument
.It Cm collect
Collect the system logs into a .logarchive that can be viewed later with tools
such as
.Nm
or Console.
If an output path is not specified,
.Pa system_logs.logarchive
will be created in the current directory.
.Bl -tag -width "--archive path "
.It Fl o , -output Ar path
Save the archive to the specified path or file.
If the path is a directory, a file named
.Pa system_logs.logarchive
will be created in the specified directory.
If the path contains the extension .logarchive, a new logarchive will be created
with that name at the specified path.
.It Fl S , -start Ar date/time
Limits the content capture to the date and time forward to now.
The following date/time formats are accepted:
"YYYY-MM-DD",
"YYYY-MM-DD HH:MM:SS",
"YYYY-MM-DD HH:MM:SSZZZZZ"
.It Fl l , -last Ar num Ns Op s|m|h|d
Limits the captured events to the period starting at the given interval ago from
the current time.
Time is assumed in seconds unless specified.
For example,
.Ql \&--last 2m
or
.Ql \&--last 3h .
.It Fl z , -size Ar num Op k|m
The amount of data to be captured in kilobytes or megabytes.
This is an approximation, as the actual size may be more than requested.
For example,
.Ql \&--size 100k
or
.Ql \&--size 20m .
.It Fl d , -device
Collect system logs from paired device (first device found).
.It Fl n , -device-name Ar name
Collect system logs from paired device with the given name.
.It Fl u , -device-udid Ar UDID
Collect system logs from paired device with the given UDID.
.It Fl P , -predicate Ar predicate
Collect system logs using a given predicate following NSPredicate format or
shorthand.
This option can significantly
increase the time and memory usage required to collect an archive.
For example,
.Ql \&--predicate \(dqprocess==kernel.development'\(dq .
.It Fl D , -directory Ar directory
Collect content from the provided log store directory, instead of the local log
store.
The directory must contain a system logging database similar to what can be
found in /var/db/diagnostics, and its parent directory must also contain an
uuidtext directory similar to what can be found in /var/db/uuidtext.
This option is useful to collect logs from a system partition that is not
booted, e.g. from a recovery environment or an external drive.
.El
.It Cm config
Configure, reset or read settings for the logging system.
.Cm config
commands can act system-wide or on a subsystem.
If not specified, system-wide is assumed.
If subsystem is specified, category is optional.
Requires root access.
.Bl -tag -width "--archive path "
.It Fl r , -reset | Fl s , -status
Option to show or reset the current settings for the system or a specific
subsystem.
If reset or status is not specified, a change to the configuration is assumed.
For example,
.Ql log config --reset --subsystem com.mycompany.mysubsystem
will
reset the subsystem to its default settings,
.Ql log config --status
will show the current system-wide logging settings, and
.Ql log config --mode \(dqlevel: default\(dq
will set the system log level to default.
.It Fl S , -subsystem Ar name
Set or get mode for a specified subsystem.
.It Fl c , -category Ar name
Set or get mode for a specified category.
If category is supplied, subsystem is required.
.It Fl p , -process Ar pid
Set mode for a specified pid.
.It Fl m , -mode Ar modes
Will enable given modes.
Multiple modes are comma-separated.
Modes include:
.Pp
.Bl -tag -width Ds -compact
.It Ar level Ns Pf : Ar <off|default|info|debug>
Default logging level.
The level is a hierarchy, so debug implies debug, info, and default.
.It Ar persist Ns Pf : Ar <off|default|info|debug>
Persistence level.
The persist mode is a hierarchy, so debug implies debug, info, and default.
.It Ar stream Ns Pf : Ar <live|default>
Streaming mode.
.It Ar signpost-persisted Ns Pf : Ar <off|on|default>
Signpost persistence level.
.It Ar signpost-enabled Ns Pf : Ar <off|on|default>
Signpost enablement.
.It Ar signpost-backtrace-enabled Ns Pf : Ar <off|on|default>
Signpost backtrace enablement.
.It Ar oversize-enabled Ns Pf : Ar <off|on|default>
Oversized log message enablement.
.El
.Pp
The modes available to each scope are as follows:
.Pp
.Bl -tag -width Ds -compact
.It (system-wide)
.Ar level , persist , stream
.It Fl -subsystem
.Ar level , persist , signpost-persisted , signpost-enabled ,
.Ar signpost-backtrace-enabled , oversize-enabled
.It Fl -category
.Ar level , persist , signpost-persisted , signpost-enabled ,
.Ar signpost-backtrace-enabled , oversize-enabled
.It Fl -process
.Ar level , persist , stream
.El
.El
.It Cm diagnose
Print various diagnostic information for a given archive.
Running without options is the same as using .Fl -all.
.Bl -tag -width "--archive path "
.It Fl A , -archive Ar archive
Archive to be diagnosed.
.It Fl v , -verbose
Output additional debugging information.
.It Fl j , -json
Output in JSON.
.It Fl p , -process Ar process
Only print relevant quarantine information for the given process.
.It Fl a , -all
Print all available diagnostics.
.It Fl e , -erase
Print timestamps emitted when .Nm purged the archive.
.It Fl s , -logd-starts
Print timestamps emitted when .Nm starts.
.It Fl t , -time
Print the beginning capture time for each given log book.
.It Fl q , -quarantine
Print detailed quarantine information per process.
.El
.It Cm emit
Emit a log message to the system logging facility.
This command is primarily used for testing and debugging purposes,
allowing generation of log entries with specific types, subsystems, and
categories.
.Bl -tag -width "--subsystem name "
.It Fl t , -type Ar type
Specify the type of log message to emit.
Valid types are:
.Cm debug ,
.Cm info ,
.Cm default ,
.Cm error ,
.Cm fault ,
.Cm signpost-event ,
.Cm signpost-begin ,
and
.Cm signpost-end .
If not specified,
.Cm default
is used.
.It Fl S , -subsystem Ar name
Specify the subsystem identifier for the log message.
The subsystem is typically a reverse DNS name identifying the component
generating the log message (e.g.,
.Cm com.example.myapp ) .
If not specified, the message uses
.Dv OS_LOG_DEFAULT .
.It Fl c , -category Ar name
Specify the category within the subsystem.
Categories provide additional organization within a subsystem.
This option does nothing unless used with
.Fl -subsystem .
If a subsystem is specified but no category is provided, an empty category is
used.
.It Fl i , -signpost-id Ar id
Specify the signpost identifier for interval operations.
This option is used with
.Cm signpost-begin
and
.Cm signpost-end
types to create matching pairs for performance measurement intervals.
The id should be a positive integer that uniquely identifies the interval.
If not specified for signpost operations,
.Dv OS_SIGNPOST_ID_EXCLUSIVE
is used.
.It Fl p , -public
Emit the message publicly.
.It Ar message
The text message to emit to the logging system.
This is a required argument and should be the last argument on the command line.
By default, this is emitted as a private string.
.El
.It Cm erase
Delete selected log data from the system.
If no arguments are specified, the main log datastore and inflight log data will
be deleted.
.Bl -tag -width "--archive path "
.It Fl A , -all
Deletes main log datastore, and inflight log data as well as time-to-live data
(TTL), and the fault and error content.
.It Fl t , -ttl
Deletes time-to-live log content.
.It Fl -uuidtext
Prunes erased uuids from the database.
.El
.It Cm repack
Repack all logs in a logarchive matching a predicate into a new logarchive
with only the matching logs.
Includes info and debug messages by default.
.Bl -tag -width "--sort events | bytes "
.It Fl A , -archive Ar archive
Archive to be repacked.
.\"TODO: these are not documented since they don't work yet. rdar://137683254
.\".It Fl l , -last Ar num Ns Oo Ar s|m|h|d Oc | Ar boot
.\"Limits the included events to the period starting at the given interval ago from
.\"the current time, or beginning at the last boot contained in the log archive.
.\"Time is assumed in seconds unless specified.
.\"For example,
.\".Ql \&--last 2m
.\"or
.\".Ql \&--last 3h .
.\".It Fl S , -start Ar date/time
.\"Includes events starting from the provided date.
.\"The following date/time formats are accepted:
.\""YYYY-MM-DD",
.\""YYYY-MM-DD HH:MM:SS",
.\""YYYY-MM-DD HH:MM:SSZZZZZ"
.\".It Fl E , -end Ar date/time
.\"Includes events up to the provided date.
.\"The following date/time formats are accepted:
.\""YYYY-MM-DD",
.\""YYYY-MM-DD HH:MM:SS",
.\""YYYY-MM-DD HH:MM:SSZZZZZ"
.It Fl t , -no-timeout
Remove the default timeout (5 Mins) for repacking.
This is generally not needed.
.It Fl w , -fatal-warnings
Treat all warnings as errors and stop repacking.
.It Fl p , -predicate Ar predicate
Include events matching a predicate.
See section
.Sx PREDICATE-BASED FILTERING
below.
.It Fl v , -verbose
Include extra output for debugging.
.It Fl m , -mutate
Mutate logarchive 'in-place' without copying it.
This is a destructive operation
and cannot be undone.
.It Fl u , -skip-uuid-purge
Skip purging unused UUIDs from the resulting archive.
.El
.It Cm show
Shows contents of the system log datastore, archive or a specific tracev3 file.
If a file or archive is not specified, the system datastore will be shown.
If it is from a future system version that log cannot understand,
it exits with
.Dv EX_DATAERR
.Pq 65
and an error message.
The output contains only default level messages unless
.Fl -info
and/or
.Fl -debug
are specified.
The output does not contain signposts unless
.Fl -signpost
is specified.
.Bl -tag -width "--archive path "
.It Fl A , -archive Ar archive
Display events stored in the given archive.
The archive must be a valid log archive bundle with the suffix
\fB.logarchive\fR.
.It Fl f , -file Ar file
Display events stored in the given \fB.tracev3\fR file.
In order to be decoded, the file must be contained within a valid
\fB.logarchive\fR bundle, or part of the system logs directory.
.It Fl -[no-]pager
Enable or disable pagination of output via less.
.It Fl p , -predicate Ar filter
Filters messages based on the provided predicate, based on NSPredicate or
shorthand.
A compound predicate or multiple predicates can be provided.
See section
.Sx PREDICATE-BASED FILTERING
below.
.It Fl H , -highlight-predicate Ar filter
Like
.Fl -predicate ,
but highlighting matching results.
.It Fl P , -process Ar pid | process
The process on which to operate.
This option can be passed more than once to operate on multiple processes.
.It Fl -source
Include symbol names and source line numbers for messages, if available.
.It Fl s , -style Ar style
Control the output formatting of events:
.Bl -tag -width "default "
.It Ar default
Human readable output.
ISO-8601 date (microsecond precision and timezone offset), thread ID, log type,
activity ID, process ID, TTL, process, subsystem, category and message content.
.It Ar compact
Compact human readable output.
ISO-8601 date (millisecond precision), abbreviated log type, process, processID,
thread ID, subsystem, category and message content.
This output uses less horizontal space to indicate event metadata than the
.Ar default
style.
.It Ar json
JSON output.
Event data is synthesized as an array of JSON dictionaries.
.It Ar ndjson
Line-delimited JSON output.
Event data is synthesized as JSON dictionaries, each emitted on a single line.
A trailing record, identified by the inclusion of a "finished" field, is emitted
to indicate the end of events.
.It Ar syslog
syslog-style output intended to be more compatible with the output format used
by
.Xr syslog 1 .
.El
.It Fl c , -color Ar auto | always | none
Control the display of colorized output.
By default,
.Nm
will disable colorized output when not directed to a terminal, unless overidden
using
.Ar always .
.It Fl D , -directory Ar directory
Reads content from the provided log store directory, instead of the local log
store.
The directory must contain a system logging database similar to what can be
found in /var/db/diagnostics, and its parent directory must also contain an
uuidtext directory similar to what can be found in /var/db/uuidtext.
This option is useful to display logs from a system partition that is not
booted, e.g. from a recovery environment or an external drive.
.It Fl S , -start Ar date/time
Shows content starting from the provided date.
The following date/time formats are accepted:
"YYYY-MM-DD",
"YYYY-MM-DD HH:MM:SS",
"YYYY-MM-DD HH:MM:SSZZZZZ"
.It Fl E , -end Ar date/time
Shows content up to the provided date.
The following date/time formats are accepted:
"YYYY-MM-DD",
"YYYY-MM-DD HH:MM:SS",
"YYYY-MM-DD HH:MM:SSZZZZZ"
.It Fl l , -last Ar num Ns Oo Ar s|m|h|d Oc | Ar boot
Shows events that occurred within the given time relative to the end of the log
archive, or beginning at the last boot contained within the log archive.
Time may be specified as minutes, hours or days.
Time is assumed in seconds unless specified.
For example,
.Ql \&--last 2m
or
.Ql \&--last 3h .
If set to zero, this will reset a previous
.Fl l
setting or do nothing.
.It Fl L , -last24
Shorthand for
.Fl -last Ar 24h .
.It Fl T , -today
Show events since the start of the day.
.It Fl Y , -yesterday
Show events for the full day prior.
.It Fl Z , -timezone Ar local | timezone
Displays content in the local timezone, or a specified timezone (see
.Xr tzset 3 ) .
If not specified, the output is displayed in the timezone at the time the entry
was written to source archive or file.
.It Fl -metric
Show metrics messages in the output.
.It Fl -[no-]info
Disable or enable info level messages in the output.
(By default info messages are not displayed.)
.It Fl -[no-]debug
Disable or enable debug level messages in the output.
(By default debug messages are not displayed.)
.It Fl -[no-]signpost
Disable or enable display of signposts in the output.
(By default signposts are not displayed.)
.It Fl -[no-]loss
Disable or enable display of loss event messages in the output.
(By default loss event messages are not displayed.)
.El
.It Cm stats
Shows a breakdown of the events contained within a log datastore, archive, tracev3, tailspin or apple trace file.
The following options can be supplied to all modes of
.Cm log stats :
.Bl -tag -width "--sort events | bytes "
.It Fl A , -archive Ar archive
Display statistics for events stored in the given archive.
The archive must be a valid log archive
bundle with the suffix \fB.logarchive\fR.
.It Fl F , -file Ar file
Display statistics for events stored in the given file.
The file may be a \fB.tracev3\fR, \fB.ktrace\fR, \fB.atrc\fR,
or \fB.tailspin\fR file.
A \fB.tracev3\fR file must be contained within a valid
\fB.logarchive\fR bundle, or part of the system logs directory.
This option is mutually exclusive with
.Fl -archive ,
.Fl -per-book ,
and
.Fl -per-file .
.It Fl o , -sort Ar events | bytes
Sort tabulated data output by number of events, or number of bytes.
.It Fl c , -count Ar count | all
Limit tabulated data to the given number of lines, or
.Ar all
displays all entries in tables.
.It Fl s , -style Ar human | json
Control the format style of the requested output mode.
.It Fl l , -last Ar num Ns Oo Ar s|m|h|d Oc | Ar boot
Shows statistics for events that occurred within the given time relative to the
end of the log archive, or beginning at the last boot contained within the log
archive.
Time may be specified as minutes, hours or days.
Time is assumed in seconds unless specified.
If set to zero, this will reset a previous
.Fl l
setting or do nothing.
.It Fl S , -start Ar date/time
Shows statistics for events starting from the provided date.
The following date/time formats are accepted:
"YYYY-MM-DD",
"YYYY-MM-DD HH:MM:SS",
"YYYY-MM-DD HH:MM:SSZZZZZ"
.It Fl E , -end Ar date/time
Shows statistics for events up to the provided date.
.It Fl -[no-]pager
Enable or disable pagination of output via less.
.El
.Pp
In addition, one of the following output modes can be supplied:
.Bl -tag -width "--sort events | bytes "
.It Fl O , -overview
Displays statistics for the entire archive.
.It Fl B , -per-book
Displays statistics per log book, the subsections of a log archive.
.It Fl f , -per-file
Displays statistics per file in the archive.
.It Fl b , -sender Ar sender
Displays statistics for a given sender image name.
.It Fl p , -process Ar process
Displays statistics for a given originating process.
.It Fl P , -predicate Ar predicate
Displays statistics for all events matching the given predicate.
.El
.It Cm stream
Stream activities, log data or trace messages for the system or from a given
process.
By default, the command assumes system-wide streaming.
Specifying a process id with the --process option will narrow the results.
.Bl -tag -width "--archive path "
.It Fl c , -color Ar auto | always | none
Highlight certain types of log messages.
In auto, highlighting will be disabled if the output is detected to be non-TTY.
.It Fl l , -level Ar default | info | debug
Shows messages at specified level and below.
The level is a hierarchy.
Specifying debug implies debug, info and default.
.It Fl P , -predicate Ar filter
Filters messages using the provided predicate based on NSPredicate or shorthand.
A compound predicate or multiple predicates can be provided.
See section
.Sx PREDICATE-BASED FILTERING
below.
.It Fl p , -process Ar pid | process
The process on which to operate.
This option can be passed more than once to operate on multiple processes.
.It Fl u , -user Ar uid | user
The user on which to operate.
This option can be passed more than once to operate on multiple users.
.It Fl s , -style Ar default | compact | json | ndjson | syslog
Output the content as a different style.
.It Fl -source
Include symbol names and source line numbers for messages, if available.
.It Fl T , -timeout Ar time Op m|h|d
Timeout the stream operation after a specified time.
For example,
.Ql \&--timeout 5m
or
.Ql \&--timeout 1h .
If minutes, hours, days not specified, seconds will be used.
.It Fl Y , -type Ar activity | log | trace
Dictates the type of events to stream from a process.
By default all types are streamed unless otherwise specified.
Pass an appropriate
.Fl -type
for each requested type of event.
.It Fl -mach-continuous-time
Print mach continuous time timestamps rather than walltime.
.It Fl -unreliable
Annotate output with whether the log was emitted unreliably.
.It Fl -ignore-dropped
Don't output anything for dropped messages whilst streaming.
.It Fl o , -payload
Stream payload information.
May not use syslog style.
.It Fl -[no]-backtrace
Control whether backtraces are shown.
.It Fl -[no]-debug
Include or don't include debug level events.
.It Fl -[no]-info
Include or don't include info level events.
.It Fl -metric
Include metrics events.
.It Fl -[no]-signpost
Include or don't include signpost events.
.El
.El
.Pp
All commands accept the following options:
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It Fl h , -help
Print a brief help message and exit with
.Dv EX_USAGE
.Pq 64 .
.El
.Sh PREDICATE-BASED FILTERING
Using predicate-based filters via the
.Fl -predicate
option allows users to focus on messages based on the provided filter criteria.
For detailed information on the use of predicate based filtering, please refer
to the
.Lk https://developer.apple.com/library/archive/documentation/Cocoa/Conceptual/Predicates/Articles/pSyntax.html "Predicate Format String Syntax" .
.Pp
The
.Ar filter
argument defines one or more pattern clauses following NSPredicate rules.
Run
.Cm log help predicates
for the full list of supported keys.
Supported keys include:
.Bl -tag -width "processImagePath "
.It \fBeventType\fR
The type of event: \fBactivityCreateEvent\fR, \fBactivityTransitionEvent\fR,
\fBlogEvent\fR, \fBsignpostEvent\fR, \fBstateEvent\fR, \fBtimesyncEvent\fR,
\fBtraceEvent\fR and \fBuserActionEvent\fR.
.It \fBeventMessage\fR
The pattern within the message text, or activity name of a log/trace entry.
.It \fBmessageType\fR
For logEvent and traceEvent, the type of the message itself: \fBdefault\fR,
\fBinfo\fR, \fBdebug\fR, \fBerror\fR or \fBfault\fR.
.It \fBprocess\fR
The name of the process that originated the event.
.It \fBprocessImagePath\fR
The full path of the process that originated the event.
.It \fBsender\fR
The name of the library, framework, kernel extension, or mach-o image, that
originated the event.
.It \fBsenderImagePath\fR
The full path of the library, framework, kernel extension, or mach-o image, that
originated the event.
.It \fBsubsystem\fR
The subsystem used to log an event.
Only works with log messages generated with
.Xr os_log 3
APIs.
.It \fBcategory\fR
The category used to log an event.
Only works with log messages generated with
.Xr os_log 3
APIs.
When category is used, the \fBsubsystem\fR filter should also be provided.
.El
.Sh PREDICATE-BASED FILTERING EXAMPLES
Filter for specific subsystem:
.Bd -literal
log show --predicate 'subsystem == "com.example.my_subsystem"'
.Ed
.Pp
Filter for specific subsystem and category:
.Bd -literal
log show --predicate '(subsystem == "com.example.my_subsystem") &&
    (category == "desired_category")'
.Ed
.Pp
Filter for specific subsystem and categories:
.Bd -literal
log show --predicate '(subsystem == "com.example.my_subsystem") &&
    (category IN { "category1", "category2" })'
.Ed
.Pp
Filter for a specific subsystem and sender(s):
.Bd -literal
log show --predicate '(subsystem == "com.example.my_subsystem") &&
    ((senderImagePath ENDSWITH "mybinary") ||
     (senderImagePath ENDSWITH "myframework"))'
.Ed
.Sh PREDICATE-BASED FILTERING EXAMPLES WITH LOG LINE
.Bd -literal
log show system_logs.logarchive --predicate 'subsystem == "com.example.subsystem"
    and category contains "CHECK"'
.Ed
.Bd -literal
Timestamp                       Thread     Type        Activity     PID
2016-06-13 11:46:37.248693-0700 0x7c393    Default     0x0          10371  timestamp: [com.example.subsystem.CHECKTIME] Time is 06/13/2016 11:46:37
.Ed
.Bd -literal
log show --predicate 'processImagePath endswith "hidd" and
    senderImagePath contains[cd] "IOKit"' --info
.Ed
.Bd -literal
Timestamp                       Thread     Type        Activity     PID
2016-06-10 13:54:34.593220-0700 0x250      Info        0x0          113    hidd: (IOKit) [com.apple.iohid.default] Loaded 6 HID plugins
.Ed
.Sh SHORTHAND-BASED FILTERING
Use shorthand filters via the
.Fl -predicate
option as an alternative to NSPredicate-based syntax.
Run
.Cm log help shorthand
for the full list of supported keys.
Supported keys include:
.Bl -tag -width "message, m, or omit "
.It Cm message , m , No or Cm omit
The pattern within the message text.
.It Cm process , p
The name of the process that originated the event.
.It Cm processImagePath , pip
The full path of the process that originated the event.
.It Cm pid
The identifier of the process that originated the event.
.It Cm subsystem , s
The subsystem used to log an event.
Only works with log messages generated with os_log(3) APIs.
.It Cm category , c
The category used to log an event.
Only works with log messages generated with os_log(3) APIs.
.It Cm type
A type of message:
.Cm default ,
.Cm info ,
.Cm debug ,
.Cm error ,
.Cm fault ,
.Cm signpost ,
.Cm statedump ,
or
.Cm activity .
.El
.Pp
Supported operators include
.Bl -tag -width ":, contains "
.It Cm "=" , is
Equality.
.It Cm "!=" , \&<>
Inequality.
.It Cm ":" , contains
Contains a substring.
.It Cm "!:"
Does not contain a substring.
.It Cm ":^"
Starts with.
.It Cm endswith
Ends with.
.It Cm "<=" , ">="
Numerical comparison.
.It Cm ~/regex/
Regular expression.
.El
.Sh VALUES
Values can be grouped together using a vertical bar as a logical OR operator.
When a vertical bar is used on the right hand side of an equality operator, the
comparison becomes case-sensitive.
.Sh SHORTHAND-BASED FILTERING EXAMPLES
Filter for specific subsystem:
.Bd -literal
log show --predicate 's=com.example.my_subsystem'
.Ed
.Pp
Filter for categories containing "network" with messages containing certain
text:
.Bd -literal
log show --predicate 'c:network and "subtext to find"'
.Ed
.Pp
Filter for specific subsystem and categories:
.Bd -literal
log show --predicate 's=com.example.my_subsystem and category=category1|category2'
.Ed
.Pp
Filter for errors from processes:
.Bd -literal
log show --predicate 'p=myprocess|yourprocess and type=error'
.Ed
.Sh ENVIRONMENT
The following environment variables affect the execution of
.Nm :
.Bl -tag -width "OS_ACTIVITY_PROPAGATE_MODE "
.It Ev LOG_COLORS
Controls the color of text output from
.Cm log show .
This string is a concatenation of pairs of the format
.Ar f Ns Ar b ,
where
.Ar f
is the foreground color and
.Ar b
is the background color.
.Pp
The color designators are as follows:
.Pp
.Bl -tag -width 4n -offset indent -compact
.It Sy a
black
.It Sy b
red
.It Sy c
green
.It Sy d
brown
.It Sy e
blue
.It Sy f
magenta
.It Sy g
cyan
.It Sy h
light grey
.It Sy A
bold black, usually shows up as dark grey
.It Sy B
bold red
.It Sy C
bold green
.It Sy D
bold brown, usually shows up as yellow
.It Sy E
bold blue
.It Sy F
bold magenta
.It Sy G
bold cyan
.It Sy H
bold light grey; looks like bright white
.It Sy x
default foreground or background
.El
.Pp
Note that the above are standard
\*[Ai]
colors.
The actual display may differ
depending on the color capabilities of the terminal in use.
.Pp
The order of the attributes are as follows:
.Pp
.Bl -enum -offset indent -compact
.It
timestamp
.It
thread identifier
.It
event type
.It
activity identifier
.It
process identifier
.It
time-to-live
.It
process name
.It
sender image name
.It
subsystem
.It
category
.It
event message
.It
highlight color
.El
.Pp
The default is
.Qq xxxxxxxxxxxxFxdxcxExxxxA ,
i.e. bold magenta process name, yellow sender, green subsystem, bold blue
category and dark grey background for highlighted lines.
.It Ev LOG_STYLE
Control the default output style of
.Cm log show :
default, compact, json or syslog.
.It Ev OS_ACTIVITY_MODE
Change the mode of launched processes to:
.Bl -tag -width "debug " -compact
.It Fa info
Enables info level messages.
Does not override logging Preferences that have info level disabled.
.It Fa debug
Enables debug level messages which includes info level messages.
Does not override logging Preferences that have info level or debug level
disabled.
.El
.It Ev OS_ACTIVITY_STREAM
Change the type of streaming enabled.
.Bl -tag -width "debug " -compact
.It Fa live
Live streaming from the process using IPC.
.El
.It Ev OS_ACTIVITY_PROPAGATE_MODE
If set, will propagate the mode settings via activities.
.El
.Sh FILES
You can control the execution of
.Cm log show
and
.Cm log stream
with a configuration file located at
.Pa ~/.logrc .
Given a
.Pa ~/.logrc
like this:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
# .logrc - default log(1) arguments, handy predicate shortcuts

show:
    --style compact
    --last 1h
    --info      # turn back off with --no-info
    --no-debug  # turn back on with --debug

predicate:
    app 'process == "application"'
    errors 'process == "application" and messageType == error'
    s
        'process == "application" and '         # adjacent strings
        'subsystem == "com.example.support"'    # get merged
.Ed
.Pp
.Cm log show
would automatically run as though the arguments
.Bd -literal -offset indent
--style compact --last 1h --info --no-debug
.Ed
.Pp
were passed in.
Explicit options will override the arguments provided by
.Pa ~/.logrc .
Furthermore, running with
.Fl -predicate Ar app
would be the same as using:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
--predicate 'process == "application"'
.Ed
.Pp
The syntax of the
.Pa ~/.logrc
file made of
comments,
section headers,
options,
words,
and single-quoted strings.
Comments start with the hash character
and run to the end of the line.
Otherwise, contents are whitespace-separated.
.Pp
The structure of the
.Pa ~/.logrc
file is broken into sections.
Section headers are specified by a word and a colon.
There are three kinds of sections.
The
.Cm show\&:
and
.Cm stream\&:
sections operate similarly.
Their contents are literal options and arguments
that will be passed to the respective command
as if they were entered on the command line.
The
.Cm predicate\&:
section creates aliases for predicates.
It is made up of pairs of:
.Bd -filled -offset indent
.Ar word
.Sm off
.Li '
.Ar predicate
.Li '
.Sm on
.Ed
.Pp
where
.Ar word
is a combination of letters (presumably a simple, easy-to-type one) and
.Ar predicate
is some filtering logic, as described in the
.Sx PREDICATE-BASED FILTERING
section above.
The
.Ar predicate
is delimited by single quotes, but
adjacent quoted elements are "glued" together;
this helps in making long predicates easier to read and write.
.Sh EXAMPLES
View recent log messages:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
log show --last 1h
.Ed
.Pp
Stream live log messages:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
log stream
.Ed
.Pp
Emit a test log message:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
log emit "Test message"
.Ed
.Pp
Emit an error message with subsystem information:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
log emit --type error --subsystem com.example.app "An error occurred"
.Ed
.Pp
Emit a signpost event for performance analysis:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
log emit --type signpost-event "Performance marker reached"
.Ed
.Pp
Begin a signpost interval for performance measurement:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
log emit --type signpost-begin --signpost-id 42 "Operation started"
.Ed
.Pp
End a signpost interval for performance measurement:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
log emit --type signpost-end --signpost-id 42 "Operation completed"
.Ed
.Pp
Begin and end a signpost interval with subsystem information:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
log emit --subsystem com.example.app --category performance \\
         --type signpost-begin --signpost-id 123 "Database query started"
log emit --subsystem com.example.app --category performance \\
         --type signpost-end --signpost-id 123 "Database query completed"
.Ed
.Pp
Show help for a specific command:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
log help show
log help emit
.Ed
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr os_log 3 ,
.Xr os_trace 3
