.\" Copyright (c) 2026 Apple Inc.  All Rights Reserved.
.\"
.Dd January 13, 2026
.Dt MDSCHEMA 1
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm mdschema
.Nd compile, query, and display information about a Spotlight metadata attribute schema
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Nm
.Op Fl h
.Op Fl a
.Op Fl A Ar attribute
.Op Fl t Ar type
.Op Fl compile Ar path
.Op Fl path Ar path
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Nm
utility is used to compile, query, and display information about a Spotlight
metadata attribute schema.
Spotlight uses a schema to define metadata attributes that can be associated
with files and other searchable content.
This tool allows compilation of a custom schema, along with inspection of the
schema, including attribute definitions, display names, and content type
associations.
.Pp
The following options are available:
.Bl -tag -width indent
.It Fl h
Display usage information and exit.
.It Fl a
Display all metadata attributes defined in the schema.
This shows a complete list of available attribute names that can be used with
Spotlight queries and file metadata operations.
.It Fl A Ar attribute
Display detailed information about a specific metadata attribute, including
its type (string, number, date, boolean), whether it is multi-valued, display
name, description, and other metadata properties.
The
.Ar attribute
should be a valid metadata attribute name such as
.Ql kMDItemDisplayName
or
.Ql com_apple_metadata_modtime .
.It Fl t Ar type
Display the metadata attributes associated with a specific Uniform Type
Identifier (UTI). This shows which attributes are relevant for a particular
content type, including display attributes, preview attributes, and read-only
attributes.
The
.Ar type
should be a valid UTI such as
.Ql public.jpeg
or
.Ql com.apple.mail.email .
.It Fl compile Ar path
Compile a custom metadata attribute schema cache and write it to the specified
path.
This option processes all available schema definition files and generates a
schema database that can be used by Spotlight.
This is useful for adding a custom metadata schema to an application resource
bundle.
.It Fl path Ar path
Write the output to the specified file path instead of stdout.
This option can be used with other query options to save the schema information
to a file.
.El
.Sh EXAMPLES
Display all available metadata attributes:
.Pp
.Dl mdschema -a
.Pp
Get information about a specific attribute:
.Pp
.Dl mdschema -A kMDItemDisplayName
.Pp
Show attributes for JPEG images:
.Pp
.Dl mdschema -t public.jpeg
.Pp
Compile and build a metadata schema cache:
.Pp
.Dl mdschema -compile /path/to/schema.xml -path /path/to/schema.mdplist
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr mdfind 1 ,
.Xr mdimport 1 ,
.Xr mdls 1 ,
.Xr mdutil 1
