.\" MetalPerformanceHUD
.Dd May 26, 2026
.Dt MetalPerformanceHUD
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm MetalPerformanceHUD
.Nd Metal Performance HUD overview and configuration
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The Metal Performance HUD (heads-up display) is a real-time overlay that
displays graphics performance information for Metal apps.
The overlay helps developers spot subtle performance issues such as large
variations in rendering time and identify scopes worth capturing in Xcode
or Instruments.
.Pp
The HUD can also log per-frame statistics to the console, but console
logging is deprecated; see
.Sx LOGGING
and
.Sx COLLECTING PERFORMANCE DATA .
.Pp
By default, the top of the HUD shows the Metal device, the layer
resolution, an indicator for whether the present mode is direct or
composited, the amount of memory allocated by the app and Metal, and
whether Game Mode is on or off.
The bottom section shows the average frames per second (FPS), GPU time,
and frame interval, with a chart graphing the frame interval for the past
120 frames.
The HUD can be customized to include additional metrics; see
.Sx METRICS
below.
.Sh LOGGING
The HUD recognizes a family of
.Ev MTL_HUD_LOG_*
environment variables
.Po
.Ev MTL_HUD_LOG_ENABLED
and
.Ev MTL_HUD_LOG_SHADER_ENABLED
.Pc
that write per-frame statistics to the console.
.Pp
.Sy Avoid using these variables.
Console logging is deprecated and should not be used for new workflows.
It emits unstructured text, cannot be opened in Instruments, and captures
only a subset of the available metrics.
For recording and analyzing performance data, use
.Xr metalperftrace 1
instead; see
.Sx COLLECTING PERFORMANCE DATA .
.Sh ENABLING THE HUD
The Metal Performance HUD can be enabled in several ways.
.Ss From Xcode
Use the runtime diagnostics options in the scheme settings:
.Bl -enum -offset indent
.It
In the Xcode toolbar, choose
.Sy Edit Scheme
from the
.Sy Scheme
menu, or choose
.Sy Product > Scheme > Edit Scheme .
.It
In the scheme action panel, select
.Sy Run .
.It
In the action setting tab, click
.Sy Diagnostics .
.It
Select
.Sy Show Graphics Overview
to enable the HUD, and click
.Sy Close .
.El
.Ss On a device
On iOS, iPadOS, or tvOS, the HUD is enabled in the Developer settings:
.Bl -enum -offset indent
.It
Open the
.Sy Settings
app.
.It
Select
.Sy Developer .
.It
Under
.Sy Graphics HUD ,
toggle
.Sy Show Graphics HUD
to enable the overlay.
.El
.Pp
The Metal Performance HUD appears for apps you build and install yourself
to your development devices.
The device must have a development provisioning profile installed for the
Developer options to appear in the Settings app.
.Ss Programmatically
Either of the following enables the HUD without setting environment
variables or scheme options:
.Bl -bullet -offset indent
.It
Add
.Li MetalHudEnabled
to the app's
.Pa Info.plist
file.
.It
Add
.Li MetalHUDForceEnabled=1
to the app's
.Li NSUserDefaults .
.El
.Ss From metalperftrace
The
.Xr metalperftrace 1
tool can enable the HUD in an already-running Metal process without
relaunching it.
Use the
.Cm setup
subcommand with the
.Li hud
feature, targeting the process by PID:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
metalperftrace setup --enable hud --pid 1234
.Ed
.Pp
Disable it again with
.Fl \-disable Li hud .
This is useful for turning the overlay on for a process that was launched
without any of the options above.
See
.Sx COLLECTING PERFORMANCE DATA .
.Sh ENVIRONMENT
The HUD recognizes the following environment variables.
The same keys may also be set as entries in the
.Li developerHUDProperties
dictionary of a
.Li CAMetalLayer
to apply the same effects programmatically.
.Bl -tag -width "MTL_HUD_ENCODER_GPU_TIMELINE_FRAME_COUNT"
.It Ev MTL_HUD_ENABLED
Enables the Metal Performance HUD overlay for the app.
.Pp
Accepted values:
.Li 1
(or any non-zero integer) to enable;
.Li 0
to disable.
.Pp
Default:
.Li 0
(disabled).
.It Ev MTL_HUD_CONFIG_FILE
Path to a HUD configuration property list file to load at startup.
The file must be readable by the app, and the path is resolved through
symlinks before loading.
A configuration file can be exported from the configuration panel using
.Sy Export HUD Configuration .
.Pp
Accepted values:
an absolute or relative path to a
.Pa .plist
file.
.Pp
Default:
none.
.It Ev MTL_HUD_OPACITY
Opacity of the overlay.
.Pp
Accepted values:
a floating-point number; values are clamped to the range
.Li [0.0, 1.0] .
.Pp
Default:
.Li 1.0
(fully opaque).
.It Ev MTL_HUD_SCALE
Scale of the overlay, expressed as a fraction of the drawable width.
The rendered width never falls below 300 pixels.
.Pp
Accepted values:
a floating-point number; values are clamped to the range
.Li [0.1, 1.0] .
.Pp
Default:
.Li 0.2
(20% of the drawable width).
.It Ev MTL_HUD_ALIGNMENT
Position of the overlay.
.Pp
Accepted values:
.Li topleft ,
.Li topcenter ,
.Li topright ,
.Li centerleft ,
.Li centered ,
.Li centerright ,
.Li bottomleft ,
.Li bottomcenter ,
or
.Li bottomright .
The corresponding short forms
.Li tl , tc , tr , cl , c , cr , bl , bc ,
and
.Li br
are also accepted.
.Pp
Default:
.Li topright .
.It Ev MTL_HUD_POSITION_X , Ev MTL_HUD_POSITION_Y
Absolute position of the overlay in pixels.
Setting either variable overrides
.Ev MTL_HUD_ALIGNMENT .
.Pp
Accepted values:
a number of pixels, measured from the top-left of the drawable, in the
ranges
.Li [0, drawableWidth]
and
.Li [0, drawableHeight] ,
respectively.
.Pp
Default:
.Li 0 .
.It Ev MTL_HUD_ELEMENTS
Selects which metrics appear in the overlay.
.Pp
Accepted values:
a comma-separated list of metric names (see
.Sx METRICS ) ,
or one of the named layouts
.Li FPS ,
.Li Lite ,
.Li Default ,
.Li Rich ,
or
.Li Full .
.Pp
Default:
the
.Li Lite
layout.
.It Ev MTL_HUD_ENCODER_TIMING_ENABLED
Turns on encoder-based GPU time tracking.
Encoder GPU time tracking is only available if the app does not use the
Metal counter sample buffer, and may increase the CPU cost of the HUD due
to additional data processing.
.Pp
Accepted values:
.Li 1
to enable;
.Li 0
to disable.
.Pp
Default:
.Li 0
(disabled).
.It Ev MTL_HUD_ENCODER_GPU_TIMELINE_FRAME_COUNT
Maximum number of frames that appear in the GPU timeline.
Requires encoder GPU time tracking.
.Pp
Accepted values:
an integer; values are clamped to the range
.Li [1, 10] .
.Pp
Default:
.Li 6 .
.It Ev MTL_HUD_ENCODER_GPU_TIMELINE_SWAP_DELTA
Update interval of the GPU timeline, in seconds.
Requires encoder GPU time tracking.
.Pp
Accepted values:
a floating-point number of seconds; values are clamped to the range
.Li [0.1, 10.0] .
.Pp
Default:
.Li 1.0 .
.It Ev MTL_HUD_SHOW_ZERO_METRICS
Shows metrics whose value has been
.Li 0
since the app launched or since the last reset.
The HUD hides such metrics by default, since they may not be available or
are not used in the current context.
.Pp
Accepted values:
.Li 1
to show zero-valued metrics;
.Li 0
to hide them.
.Pp
Default:
.Li 0
(hidden).
.It Ev MTL_HUD_SHOW_METRICS_RANGE
Reports the range of metrics in addition to their average.
When enabled, the HUD displays the average value of the last 120 frames
along with the minimum and maximum values of the last 1200 frames.
.Pp
Accepted values:
.Li 1
to enable;
.Li 0
to disable.
.Pp
Default:
.Li 0
(disabled).
.It Ev MTL_HUD_INSIGHTS_ENABLED
Turns on the performance insights feature, which tracks Metal API usage
and highlights potential bottlenecks.
.Pp
Accepted values:
.Li 1
to enable;
.Li 0
to disable.
.Pp
Default:
.Li 0
(disabled).
.It Ev MTL_HUD_INSIGHT_TIMEOUT
Time before a performance insight disappears, in seconds.
.Pp
Accepted values:
a floating-point number of seconds; values below
.Li 1.0
are raised to
.Li 1.0 .
.Pp
Default:
.Li 10.0 .
.It Ev MTL_HUD_INSIGHT_REPORT_INTERVAL
Report interval of the performance insights, in seconds.
The HUD reports an insight if half of the frames during this interval
show a particular pattern.
.Pp
Accepted values:
a floating-point number of seconds; values below
.Li 1.0
are raised to
.Li 1.0 .
.Pp
Default:
.Li 5.0 .
.It Ev MTL_HUD_RUSAGE_UPDATE_INTERVAL
System resource usage update interval, in seconds.
.Pp
Accepted values:
a floating-point number of seconds; values below
.Li 0.1
are raised to
.Li 0.1 .
.Pp
Default:
.Li 3.0 .
.It Ev MTL_HUD_METRIC_TIMEOUT
Timeout of transient metrics, in seconds.
The HUD automatically hides transient metrics, such as MetalFX metrics,
when the corresponding feature is disabled.
.Pp
Accepted values:
a floating-point number of seconds; values below
.Li 0.1
are raised to
.Li 0.1 .
.Pp
Default:
.Li 1.0 .
.It Ev MTL_HUD_REPORT_URL
App-writable path where the system writes performance reports.
.Pp
Accepted values:
a writable file path.
.Pp
Default:
none.
.It Ev MTL_HUD_DISABLE_MENU_BAR
Disables the Metal Performance HUD menu bar item on macOS.
.Pp
Accepted values:
.Li 1
to disable the menu bar item;
.Li 0
to show it.
.Pp
Default:
.Li 0
on macOS (menu bar item shown);
.Li 1
on iOS and tvOS, where there is no menu bar.
.It Ev MTL_HUD_STATE_REPORTER_DOMAINS
Selects which StateReporting domains are displayed in the overlay.
Setting this variable also enables the State Reporters metric.
.Pp
Accepted values:
a comma-separated list of StateReporting domain names; the list may be
wrapped in double quotes.
The literal value
.Li ALL
or
.Li *
enables every available domain.
.Pp
Default:
none.
.It Ev MTL_HUD_MFX_JITTER_VIS
Enables the MetalFX jitter scatter plot in the overlay.
.Pp
Accepted values:
.Li 1
to enable;
.Li 0
to disable.
.Pp
Default:
.Li 0
(disabled).
.It Ev MTL_HUD_MFX_JITTER_OFFSET_RANGE
Maximum range of the MetalFX jitter multiplier sliders.
.Pp
Accepted values:
a floating-point number; a value of
.Ar n
produces sliders that span
.Li [-n, +n] .
.Pp
Default:
.Li 5.0
(sliders spanning
.Li [-5.0, +5.0] ) .
.It Ev MTL_HUD_LOG_ENABLED
.Sy Deprecated .
Logs per-frame statistics to the console instead of, or in addition to,
displaying them in the overlay.
Console logging is deprecated; use
.Xr metalperftrace 1
to collect performance data instead (see
.Sx COLLECTING PERFORMANCE DATA ) .
.Pp
Accepted values:
.Li 1
to enable;
.Li 0
to disable.
.Pp
Default:
.Li 0
(disabled).
.El
.Sh PROGRAMMATIC CONFIGURATION
The HUD can be configured programmatically by populating the
.Li developerHUDProperties
dictionary on a
.Li CAMetalLayer
instance:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
myMetalLayer.developerHUDProperties = [
    "mode": "default",
    "positionX": 0,
    "positionY": 0,
    // ...
]
.Ed
.Pp
The dictionary accepts the following well-known keys:
.Bl -tag -width "positionX"
.It Li mode
One of
.Li default ,
.Li main ,
or
.Li disabled .
Enables or disables the HUD for this layer.
For apps that use multiple layers, set the value to
.Li main
to designate the primary layer, since certain metrics (such as GPU time)
are calculated based on the presentation interval of the main layer.
By default, the main layer is the first layer the app creates.
.It Li positionX
Absolute X position of the HUD in pixels, in the range
.Li [0, drawableWidth] .
.It Li positionY
Absolute Y position of the HUD in pixels, in the range
.Li [0, drawableHeight] .
.El
.Pp
Any of the
.Ev MTL_HUD_*
environment variables documented in
.Sx ENVIRONMENT
may also be supplied as keys in the same dictionary.
.Sh METRICS
The
.Ev MTL_HUD_ELEMENTS
environment variable accepts a comma-separated list of metric names.
The available names are:
.Pp
.Bl -tag -width "frameintervalhistogram" -compact
.It Li device
Metal device name.
.It Li rosetta
Active architecture (x86_64) when running through the Rosetta translation
layer.
.It Li layersize
Layer size and present mode (direct or composited).
.It Li layerscale
Content scale factor and pixel format of the layer.
.It Li memory
Process memory and the
.Li currentAllocatedSize
of the
.Li MTLDevice .
.It Li thermal
Current
.Li ProcessInfo.thermalState .
.It Li fps
Rolling average of frames per second over the past 120 frames.
.It Li fpsgraph
Chart of FPS over the past 120 frames.
.It Li framenumber
Current frame number, counting drawable presents since launch or last
metric reset.
.It Li gputime
Rolling average GPU time for the past 120 frames, computed from
.Li MTLCommandBuffer
.Li gpuStartTime
and
.Li gpuEndTime .
.It Li presentdelay
Rolling average present delay for the past 120 frames, the interval
between
.Li presentDrawable
and the drawable hitting the display.
.It Li frameinterval
Rolling average on-glass time difference between two consecutive
.Li MTLDrawable
presents over the past 120 frames.
.It Li frameintervalgraph
Chart of frame interval over the past 120 frames.
.It Li frameintervalhistogram
Bucketed frame interval bar chart, with bucket size equal to the display
refresh rate.
.It Li metalcpu
Number of scheduled command buffers and encoders, and CPU encoding time
for the last frame.
.It Li shaders
Shader compiler activity: number of pipeline states, cached shaders, and
compiled shaders, plus a graph of compilation time over the past 120
frames.
.It Li disk
Disk bytes read, written, and logical writes as reported by
.Li rusage_info_current .
.It Li gputimeline
Encoder GPU time per encoder type plus a GPU timeline graph for the past
three frames every second.
Requires encoder GPU time tracking; see
.Ev MTL_HUD_ENCODER_TIMING_ENABLED .
.It Li toplabeledcommandbuffers
Most GPU-intensive command buffers with a
.Li MTLCommandBuffer.label .
Requires encoder GPU time tracking.
.It Li toplabeledencoders
Most GPU-intensive command encoders with a
.Li MTLCommandEncoder.label .
Requires encoder GPU time tracking.
.El
.Pp
The HUD also reports MetalFX metrics (scaling method, input and target
resolution, exposure, and frame interpolator state) when an app uses the
corresponding MetalFX effects.
.Sh CUSTOMIZATION ON macOS
When the HUD is enabled, a
.Sy Metal HUD
menu is added to the menu bar.
This menu provides quick access to common HUD controls, performance
report generation, and the configuration panel.
The configuration panel can also be opened by triple-clicking the HUD
overlay.
.Pp
The configuration panel exposes three sections:
.Bl -tag -width "Insights" -compact
.It Sy HUD
General controls (such as encoder GPU time tracking) and overlay opacity,
scale, and position.
.It Sy Metrics
The complete list of available overlay metrics.
.It Sy Insights
Performance insights settings.
.El
.Pp
A custom configuration can be exported as a property list using
.Sy Export HUD Configuration ,
then re-applied at launch by setting
.Ev MTL_HUD_CONFIG_FILE
to the file's path.
The
.Sy Copy HUD Configuration
menu item exports the current state as a list of environment variables
suitable for passing to the app at launch.
.Sh CUSTOMIZATION ON A DEVICE
On iOS or iPadOS, the HUD can be customized in the Developer settings:
.Bl -enum -offset indent
.It
Open the
.Sy Settings
app.
.It
Select
.Sy Developer .
.It
Under
.Sy Graphics HUD ,
tap
.Sy Graphics HUD
to access the settings.
.El
.Pp
These device settings apply to all apps that enable the Metal Performance
HUD.
Environment variables can be used to override the settings when
debugging from Xcode.
.Sh EXAMPLES
Enable the HUD for a single launch from a shell:
.Pp
.Dl "MTL_HUD_ENABLED=1 ./MyMetalApp"
.Pp
Position the HUD in the top-left corner at half opacity:
.Pp
.Dl "MTL_HUD_ENABLED=1 MTL_HUD_ALIGNMENT=topleft \e"
.Dl "    MTL_HUD_OPACITY=0.5 ./MyMetalApp"
.Pp
Show only FPS, GPU time, and the frame interval graph:
.Pp
.Dl "MTL_HUD_ENABLED=1 \e"
.Dl "    MTL_HUD_ELEMENTS=fps,gputime,frameintervalgraph \e"
.Dl "    ./MyMetalApp"
.Pp
Enable encoder GPU time tracking and the value range display:
.Pp
.Dl "MTL_HUD_ENABLED=1 MTL_HUD_ENCODER_TIMING_ENABLED=1 \e"
.Dl "    MTL_HUD_SHOW_METRICS_RANGE=1 ./MyMetalApp"
.Pp
Apply an exported HUD configuration file:
.Pp
.Dl "MTL_HUD_ENABLED=1 \e"
.Dl "    MTL_HUD_CONFIG_FILE=~/HUDConfig.plist ./MyMetalApp"
.Sh COLLECTING PERFORMANCE DATA
The system continuously records frame timing and related statistics for
all Metal layers, independently of whether the HUD overlay is visible.
The
.Xr metalperftrace 1
command-line tool retrieves this always-on data and is the recommended
way to capture performance information for later analysis, replacing
console logging.
.Pp
.Xr metalperftrace 1
can:
.Bl -bullet -offset indent
.It
Collect recorded metrics for a time range and write them as
.Pa .atrc
trace files that can be opened in Instruments
.Pq Cm collect .
.It
Print a per-process, per-layer performance summary from a collected
trace, as text or JSON
.Pq Cm overview .
.It
Stream live performance statistics from running processes as they arrive
.Pq Cm listen .
.It
Dynamically enable or disable trace features
.Em including the Metal Performance HUD itself
in a running process
.Pq Cm setup .
.El
.Pp
For example, to enable the HUD in a running process and then stream its
live statistics:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
metalperftrace setup --enable hud --pid 1234
metalperftrace listen --pid 1234
.Ed
.Pp
See
.Xr metalperftrace 1
for the full set of subcommands and options.
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr metalperftrace 1
.Pp
.Lk https://developer.apple.com/documentation/xcode/monitoring-your-metal-apps-graphics-performance "Monitoring your Metal app's graphics performance"
.Pp
.Lk https://developer.apple.com/documentation/xcode/customizing-metal-performance-hud "Customizing the Metal Performance HUD"
.Pp
.Lk https://developer.apple.com/documentation/xcode/understanding-metal-performance-hud-metrics "Understanding the Metal Performance HUD metrics"
