.\" Copyright 2024 Apple
.\"
.\" Licensed under the terms set forth in the LICENSE.txt file available at
.\" https://openusd.org/license.
.\"

.ft 1
..

.TH USDCHECKER
.SH NAME
usdchecker - Utility for checking the compliance of a given USD stage or a USDZ package.
.SH SYNOPSIS
usdchecker [options] [inputFile]
.SH DESCRIPTION
\f[B]usdchecker\f[R] is a utility that verifies a file is a compliant USD file.

Only the first sample of any relevant time-sampled attribute is checked.

General USD checks are always performed. More restrictive checks targeted at distributable consumer content are also applied when the \f[B]--arkit\f[R] option is specified to ensure the stage is compatible with RealityKit's implementation of USDZ as of 2023.

.SH OPTIONS

.TP
\f[V]inputFile\f[R]
Name of the input USD file to inspect. This is a required argument unless \f[V]--dumpRules\f[R] is specified.

.TP
\f[V]-h\f[R], \f[V]--help\f[R]
Prints out a help message and exits.

.TP
\f[V]-o\f[R], \f[V]--out\f[R] [output]
The file to which all the failed checks are output.
If unspecified, the failed checks are output to stdout.
If \f[V]stderr\f[R] is provided, terminal coloring will be suppressed.

.TP
\f[V]-s\f[R], \f[V]--skipVariants\f[R]
If specified, only the prims that are present in the
default (i.e. selected) variants are checked. When
this option is not specified, prims in all possible
combinations of variant selections are checked.

.TP
\f[V]-p\f[R], \f[V]--rootPackageOnly\f[R]
Check only the specified package. Nested packages,
dependencies and their contents are not validated.

.TP
\f[V]--noAssetChecks\f[R]
If specified, do NOT perform extra checks to help
ensure the stage or package can be easily and safely
referenced into aggregate stages.

.TP
\f[V]--arkit\f[R]
Check if the given USD stage is compatible with RealityKit's implementation of USDZ as of 2023.
These assets operate under greater constraints than usdz files for more general in-house uses,
and this option attempts to ensure that these constraints are met.

.TP
\f[V]-d\f[R], \f[V]--dumpRules\f[R]
Prints the enumerated set of rules being checked for the given set of options.

.TP
\f[V]-v\f[R], \f[V]--verbose\f[R]
Enable verbose output mode.

.TP
\f[V]-t\f[R], \f[V]--strict\f[R]
Return failure code even if only warnings are issued, for stricter compliance.

.TP
\f[V]--variants\f[R]
List of ',' separated variantSet:variant pairs to validate. Each set 
of variants in the list are validated separately. Example: 
\f[V]--variants foo:bar,baz:qux\f[R] will validate foo:bar and baz:qux together 
but \f[V]--variants foo:bar --variants baz:qux\f[R] will validate foo:bar and 
baz:qux separately. This can also be used with --variantSets to 
validate the given variants in combination with variants from the 
explicitly specified variantSets. This option is only valid when 
using the new validation framework.

.TP
\f[V]--variantSets\f[R]
List of variantSets to validate. All variants for the given 
variantSets are validated. This can also be used with --variants to 
validate the given variants in combination with variants from the 
explicitly specified variantSets. This option is only valid when 
using the new validation framework.

.TP
\f[V]--disableVariantValidationLimit\f[R]
Disable the limit set to restrict the number of variants validation 
calls. This is useful when the number of variants is large and we 
want to validate all possible combinations of variants. Default is to 
limit the number of validation calls to 1000. This option is only 
valid when using the new validation framework.

.TP
\f[V]--version\f[R]
Display program version information and exits.

.SH OPTION INTERACTIONS

Some options have specific requirements or cannot be used together:

.TP
Mutually Exclusive Options:
\f[V]--rootPackageOnly\f[R] and \f[V]--skipVariants\f[R] cannot be used together.

.TP
Required Options:
Either an input file or the \f[V]--dumpRules\f[R] option must be specified.

.TP
Validation Framework Requirements:
The \f[V]--variants\f[R], \f[V]--variantSets\f[R], and \f[V]--disableVariantValidationLimit\f[R] 
options are only valid when using the new validation framework (which is the default).

.SH Validation Tests

The following validation tests are available. Some may only run when the --arkit option is provided, and some may enable extra rigidity 
based on other contexts.

The list of validation tests and their behaviour may change in future versions of this tool.

.TP
\f[V]usdGeomValidators:StageMetadataChecker\f[R]
	All stages must declare their 'upAxis' and 'metersPerUnit'.

.TP
\f[V]usdGeomValidators:SubsetFamilies\f[R]
	Validates all of the geom subset families authored beneath an Imageable prim.

.TP
\f[V]usdGeomValidators:SubsetParentIsImageable\f[R]
	Validates that GeomSubset prims are direct descendants of an Imageable prim.

.TP
\f[V]usdShadeValidators:EncapsulationRulesValidator\f[R]
	Connectable prims (e.g. Shader, Material, etc) can only be nested inside other Container-like Connectable prims. Container-like prims include Material, NodeGraph, Light, LightFilter. Shader is not a Container-like prim.

.TP
\f[V]usdShadeValidators:MaterialBindingApiAppliedValidator\f[R]
	Verify a prim has the MaterialBindingAPI applied if it has a material binding relationship.

.TP
\f[V]usdShadeValidators:MaterialBindingCollectionValidator\f[R]
	Verify that a collection defining a material binding is well-formed

.TP
\f[V]usdShadeValidators:MaterialBindingRelationships\f[R]
	All properties named 'material:binding' or in that namespace should be relationships.

.TP
\f[V]usdShadeValidators:NormalMapTextureValidator\f[R]
	UsdUVTexture nodes that feed the _inputs:normals_ of a UsdPreviewSurface must ensure that the data is encoded and scaled properly. Specifically, since normals are expected to be in the range [(-1,-1,-1), (1,1,1)], the Texture node must transform 8-bit textures from their [0..1] range by setting its _inputs:scale_ to (2, 2, 2, 1) and _inputs:bias_ to (-1, -1, -1, 0). Normal map data is commonly expected to be linearly encoded.  However, many image-writing tools automatically set the profile of three-channel, 8-bit images to SRGB.  To prevent an unwanted transformation, the UsdUVTexture's _inputs:sourceColorSpace_ must be set to raw.

.TP
\f[V]usdShadeValidators:ShaderSdrCompliance\f[R]
	Shader prim's input types must be conforming to their appropriate sdf types in the respective sdr shader.

.TP
\f[V]usdShadeValidators:SubsetMaterialBindFamilyName\f[R]
	Geom subsets with authored material bindings should have the 'materialBind' family name.

.TP
\f[V]usdShadeValidators:SubsetsMaterialBindFamily\f[R]
	Geom subsets of the 'materialBind' family should have a restricted family type.

.TP
\f[V]usdSkelValidators:SkelBindingApiAppliedValidator\f[R]
	Verify a prim has the SkelBindingAPI applied if it has a UsdSkelBinding property.

.TP
\f[V]usdSkelValidators:SkelBindingApiValidator\f[R]
	Verify that a prim with SkelBindingAPI applied, is either of SkelRoot type or parented by a SkelRoot prim.

.TP
\f[V]usdUtilsValidators:FileExtensionValidator\f[R]
	Only valid core layer extensions (.usd, .usda, .usdc, .usdz), valid core texture extensions (.exr, .jpg, .jpeg, .png) and embedded audio files (.M4A, .MP3, .WAV) are allowed in a package.

.TP
\f[V]usdUtilsValidators:MissingReferenceValidator\f[R]
	The composed USD stage should not contain any unresolvable asset dependencies (in every possible variation of the asset), when using the default asset resolver.

.TP
\f[V]usdUtilsValidators:PackageEncapsulationValidator\f[R]
	If the root layer is a package, then its recommended for the composed stage to not contain references to files outside the package. The package should be self-contained, warn if not.

.TP
\f[V]usdUtilsValidators:UsdzPackageValidator\f[R]
	Files within all usdz packages within a stage should not be compressed or encrypted, and should be aligned to 64 bytes.

.TP
\f[V]usdValidation:CompositionErrorTest\f[R]
	Validator aims at providing all composition errors, which were generated while composing the stage.

.TP
\f[V]usdValidation:StageMetadataChecker\f[R]
	Stages that can be consumed as referenceable assets must have a valid 'defaultPrim' specified.


.SH EXIT STATUS

\f[B]usdchecker\f[R] exits with the following status codes:

.TP
\f[V]0\f[R]
Success. All validation checks passed, or only info messages were generated.

.TP
\f[V]1\f[R]
Failure. One or more validation errors were found, the stage failed to open, 
or invalid command-line arguments were provided. When \f[V]--strict\f[R] is specified, 
this code is also returned if any warnings are issued.

.SH NOTES

A file that passes the \f[B]usdchecker\f[R] may still have issues that the checker is not aware of.

.SH EXAMPLES

.TP
\f[V]usdchecker --arkit input.usdz\f[R]
Checks the input USDZ for commonly known issues.

.TP
\f[V]usdchecker --dumpRules --arkit\f[R]
Display all validation rules that would be applied with the --arkit option.

.TP
\f[V]usdchecker --strict --out report.txt input.usd\f[R]
Check input.usd with strict validation (warnings cause failure) and write results to report.txt.

.TP
\f[V]usdchecker --variants variantSet1:variant1,variantSet2:variant2 input.usd\f[R]
Validate specific variant combinations in the input USD file.

.TP
\f[V]usdchecker --skipVariants --verbose input.usdz\f[R]
Check only the default variant selections with verbose output.
