.\" Copyright (c) 2026 Apple Inc. All rights reserved.
.\"
.Dd March 10, 2026
.Dt APPLEACCOUNTTRANSPARENCYD 8
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm appleaccounttransparencyd
.Nd Apple Account Transparency daemon
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Nm
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Nm
daemon manages Apple Account transparency event storage and serves XPC
clients via the
.Sy com.apple.appleaccount.transparency
Mach service.
.Pp
The daemon stores and retrieves transparency events for the current Apple
Account user, supporting both read-only production clients and privileged
utility clients.
XPC clients holding the
.Sy com.apple.appleaccount.transparency
entitlement may call
.Sy fetchUserEvents .
Clients additionally holding the
.Sy com.apple.appleaccount.transparency.utility
entitlement may perform the full set of CRUD and lifecycle operations.
.Pp
.Nm
is launched on-demand by
.Xr launchd 8
and must not be invoked directly by users or processes; all interaction
must occur through the designated XPC service name.
.Sh FILES
.Bl -tag -width indent
.It Pa /System/Library/LaunchAgents/com.apple.appleaccounttransparencyd.plist
The
.Xr launchd 8
property list that registers the daemon on macOS.
.It Pa /System/Library/PrivateFrameworks/AppleAccountTransparency.framework/Versions/A/appleaccounttransparencyd
The daemon executable on macOS.
.It Pa ~/Library/Group\ Containers/group.com.apple.appleaccount.transparency/transparency.db
The SQLite database used to persist transparency events for the current
user.
.El
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr appleaccountd 8 ,
.Xr launchd 8 ,
.Xr launchd.plist 5
